Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: What is cryptocurrency? About 10 years ago, a pseudonym posted a paper and some code on an email list calling it Bitcoin, saying it was like electronic cash.. Level: 1. FRE: 11.31. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 57.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: Cryptocurrency was invented 10 years ago when someone posted about Bitcoin, which is like electronic cash.. Level: 2. FRE: 22.44. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: Cryptocurrency was invented 10 years ago by an anonymous poster who introduced Bitcoin, similar to electronic cash.. Level: 3. FRE: 32.98. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 39.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: About 10 years ago, a pseudonym introduced Bitcoin as electronic cash on an email list.. Level: 4. FRE: 45.25. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: 10 years ago, Bitcoin was introduced by a pseudonym as electronic cash.. Level: 5. FRE: 54.6. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: Bitcoin, a type of cryptocurrency, was conceived a decade ago as electronic cash.. Level: 6. FRE: 64.4. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: Bitcoin was started 10 years ago as electronic cash by an anonymous person.. Level: 7. FRE: 71.96. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: 10 years ago, Bitcoin was created as electronic cash.. Level: 8. FRE: 82.63. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: Bitcoin was created a decade ago as electronic cash.. Level: 9. FRE: 91.70. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: obvious is what is a cryptocurrency? So this word was kind of invented 10 years ago when, I don't know how many of you know the origin story of where Bitcoin came from, but basically a pseudonym on the internet dropped a paper and some open source code in a forum on an email list and said, hey, I have this idea for this thing called Bitcoin. It's kind of like electronic cash. Here's how I think it could work.. Summary: Bitcoin is electronic cash created 10 years ago.. Level: 10. FRE: 99.98. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 10.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: If you want to run this code and join the network, you can. The creator's identity is unknown, and they have vanished from the internet. However, their creation has inspired many and generated billions in economic value, solving many issues beyond electronic payments. Level: 9. FRE: 91.2. Total words: 50. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 71.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: Here is a code to join the peer network. The creator is unknown and has disappeared. The invention is inspiring and valuable, used beyond just payments. Level: 8. FRE: 82.5. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: The code allows you to join the peer network. Though the creator is unknown and vanished, their creation has inspired many and added billions in value, solving issues beyond payments. Level: 7. FRE: 77.4. Total words: 38. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 57.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: You can join the peer network by running the code. The creator’s identity remains unknown and they’ve vanished from the internet, but their creation has generated billions in value and various solutions beyond payments. Level: 6. FRE: 66.2. Total words: 45. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 67.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: Run this code to join the peer-to-peer network. The creator is unknown and has disappeared, but their work has inspired many, creating billions in value and solving varied problems beyond payments. Level: 5. FRE: 54.2. Total words: 40. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 61.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: Execute this code to become part of a peer-to-peer network. The creator, who is now anonymous and vanished, has motivated many and produced vast economic value, solving numerous issues beyond just payments. Level: 4. FRE: 47.5. Total words: 41. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 68.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: Use this code to join a peer-to-peer network. The anonymous creator has disappeared, but their creation has sparked widespread creativity and economic value, addressing diverse problems, not limited to just payments. Level: 3. FRE: 32.6. Total words: 34. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 62.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: With this code, you can join the peer-to-peer network. The unknown creator has vanished but has inspired many and created billions in value, solving various problems beyond payments. Level: 2. FRE: 26.8. Total words: 36. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 59.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: Utilizing the provided code enables joining the peer-to-peer network. The anonymous creator has vanished from the internet, yet their work has inspired numerous individuals and created significant economic value, addressing a variety of problems, not confined to electronic payments. Level: 1. FRE: 15.3. Total words: 40. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 76.
Original sentence: And here is some code if you want to run it and become part of this peer-to-peer network. We don't know who this person is. This person is basically virtually disappeared from the internet and from the world. But it's created something that has captured so many people's imaginations and has sort of, depending on how you measure it, created billions and billions of dollars of economic value and sort of inspired a lot of people to think about how to use this technology to solve a myriad of different problems, not just electronic payments. Summary: Utilize this code to join the peer-to-peer network. The creator's identity is unknown, and they have disappeared from the internet. Yet, their creation has inspired many and generated billions in value, solving numerous issues beyond just payments. Level: 1. FRE: 10.2. Total words: 37. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 75.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: Cryptocurrencies inspire people to think about banking the unbanked, auditability, traceability, and solving problems, but that's not what this class is about. This class focuses on technology and infrastructure. Level: 9. FRE: 92.3. Total words: 39. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 63.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: Cryptocurrencies and their technology inspire people to consider banking the unbanked, improving auditability, traceability, and removing intermediaries, but that's not what this class covers. This class is about technology and infrastructure. Level: 8. FRE: 83.2. Total words: 40. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 75.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: People are inspired by cryptocurrencies to think about banking the unbanked, auditing, and removing intermediaries, but this class is not about those applications. It focuses on technology and infrastructure. Level: 7. FRE: 76.5. Total words: 35. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 68.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: Cryptocurrencies make people think about banking the unbanked, auditability, removing intermediaries, but this class focuses on technology and infrastructure, not applications. Level: 6. FRE: 66.4. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 57.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: Cryptocurrencies inspire considering banking the unbanked, improving auditability, and removing intermediaries, but this course is about technology, not applications. Level: 5. FRE: 56.8. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 50.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: People are inspired to think of banking the unbanked and improve auditability, but this class is about technology, not applications. Level: 4. FRE: 44.4. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 44.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: Cryptocurrencies inspire thinking about banking the unbanked and more, but this class is about technology, not applications. Level: 3. FRE: 33.9. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: People think of banking the unbanked, auditability, and solving problems due to cryptocurrencies, but this class focuses on technology. Level: 2. FRE: 23.8. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: So cryptocurrencies and the technology behind them are inspiring people to think about how to bank the unbanked, add more auditability and traceability to our world, get rid of trusted intermediaries and institutions in certain situations, and basically solve every problem if you read about what blockchains can do on the internet. Now, that's not exactly what this class is about. This class is not going to be about applications. This class is going to be about technology and infrastructure. Summary: People think about banking and auditability due to cryptocurrencies, but this class is not about applications, only technology. Level: 1. FRE: 16.5. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: You will learn to create cryptocurrency, its components, importance, techniques, and applications, except digital identity or health records, focusing on technology instead.. Level: 1. FRE: 19.9. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: You will learn to make cryptocurrency and understand its components, importance, techniques, and possible applications. However, digital identity and health records are excluded, focusing only on technology.. Level: 2. FRE: 29.1. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 46.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: Learn to create a cryptocurrency, understand its elements and techniques, and explore its applications, except for digital identity and health records. Focus on the technology.. Level: 3. FRE: 39.3. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: You will learn to create a cryptocurrency, understand its components and techniques, and decide on applications, excluding digital identity and health records, focusing on technology.. Level: 4. FRE: 49.1. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: You will learn how to create a cryptocurrency, understand its components, techniques, and applications, except for digital identity and health records, focusing on technology.. Level: 5. FRE: 59.4. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 35.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: You'll learn to create a cryptocurrency, its components, techniques, and potential uses, excluding digital identity and health care records, focusing solely on technology.. Level: 6. FRE: 69.2. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: You will learn to create a cryptocurrency, its parts, techniques, and uses, except for digital identity and health records, focusing on technology.. Level: 7. FRE: 71.6. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: Learn to create a cryptocurrency, understand its elements and techniques, and decide on applications, excluding digital identity and health records. Focus on the technology.. Level: 8. FRE: 79.4. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: Learn to create cryptocurrency, its parts, techniques, and uses. Excluding digital identity and health records. Focus on tech.. Level: 9. FRE: 89.3. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: You are going to learn how to create a cryptocurrency, what goes inside a cryptocurrency, what's important, what are the techniques, and what application you choose to apply that to down the line. That's kind of up to you. But we're not going to be doing digital identity or health care records or something like that. We're going to be talking about the technology.. Summary: Learn to make cryptocurrency. Know its parts, techniques, and uses, except digital identity and health records. Focus on tech.. Level: 10. FRE: 95.3. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: How do cryptocurrencies differ from regular currencies? Terminology in this area is still being defined, with words like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus having evolving meanings.. Level: 1. FRE: 16.8. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 50.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: What sets cryptocurrencies apart from regular currencies? The terminology in this field is still evolving, with terms like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus often changing in meaning.. Level: 2. FRE: 27.4. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 45.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: How do cryptocurrencies differ from normal currencies? Terms like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus are still developing and changing in meaning.. Level: 3. FRE: 38.6. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: What makes cryptocurrencies different from regular money? The words in this field like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus are still evolving in meaning.. Level: 4. FRE: 45.5. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: People are asking how cryptocurrencies differ from regular money. Terms like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus are still evolving in this space.. Level: 5. FRE: 55.1. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: How are cryptocurrencies different from traditional money? Words like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus are still evolving in meaning.. Level: 6. FRE: 64.3. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: How do cryptocurrencies differ from regular money? Words like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus are still evolving.. Level: 7. FRE: 72.3. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 28.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: How do cryptocurrencies differ from regular money? Terms like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus are evolving.. Level: 8. FRE: 82.2. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: How are cryptocurrencies different from regular money? Terms like cryptocurrency, blockchain, and consensus are changing.. Level: 9. FRE: 90.4. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: So a big question is how are cryptocurrencies different from regular currencies? And another thing that I want to make really clear is that the terms in this space are still being defined. So you will hear people throw around all sorts of terms, cryptocurrency, blockchain, consensus. And these words are kind of have floating evolving meanings right now.. Summary: How do cryptocurrencies differ from regular money? Terms like cryptocurrency and blockchain are still evolving.. Level: 10. FRE: 96.8. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin didn’t originate from academia; rather, it emerged from an online community. It lacks the academic rigor we typically see, but that’s fine—we’re learning as we proceed.. Level: 9. FRE: 95.4. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 46.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin, unlike academic inventions, was created by online enthusiasts, not scholars. It lacks traditional rigor but that is acceptable. We're learning as we go.. Level: 8. FRE: 85.2. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin started with internet enthusiasts, not academics, so it lacks some rigor. Still, it is fine. We are learning as we continue.. Level: 7. FRE: 75.6. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin originated from an online community, not from academia, so it lacks traditional rigor. This is fine; we're learning along the way.. Level: 6. FRE: 65.4. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin came from online enthusiasts, not academics, and lacks traditional rigor. This is acceptable; we are learning.. Level: 5. FRE: 55.6. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin was created by online enthusiasts, not academics. It lacks traditional rigor, which is acceptable; we are learning as we go.. Level: 4. FRE: 45.3. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin was created by internet enthusiasts, not academics, so it lacks some rigor. This is okay; we're learning as we proceed.. Level: 3. FRE: 35.5. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin, developed by internet enthusiasts, didn't come from academia, so it lacks rigor. This is acceptable; we are learning.. Level: 2. FRE: 25.7. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin has origins with internet enthusiasts, not academia, so it lacks rigor. This is fine as we learn.. Level: 1. FRE: 14.5. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 28.
Original sentence: Part of that is because Bitcoin, the first cryptocurrency, didn't come from academia as far as we know. It came from a community of enthusiasts on the internet. And so it doesn't necessarily have the same basis and rigor that we might expect for most of our academic fields of study. It's totally OK. We're figuring it out as we go along.. Summary: Bitcoin, made by internet enthusiasts, lacks academic rigor. This is fine; we are learning.. Level: 1. FRE: 13.6. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Scholars are embracing this field. If you are a graduate student seeking research topics, the number of papers on cryptocurrency and blockchain in top journals is doubling annually. There is great potential here. Cryptocurrencies differ from regular ones.. Level: 6. FRE: 62. Total words: 38. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 61.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Academia is exploring this subject. Grad students can research this. Papers on blockchain and cryptocurrency in top journals double each year. There is significant potential. Cryptocurrencies are not standard money.. Level: 7. FRE: 73. Total words: 34. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 51.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Academics find this topic interesting. Grad students doing research can pick this. Papers on crypto and blockchain in top venues double every year. The potential is vast. Cryptocurrencies are not like regular money.. Level: 8. FRE: 82. Total words: 35. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 49.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Academia loves this focus. Grad students can research it. Papers on crypto and blockchain in top journals double every year. Big potential here. Cryptocurrencies aren't regular money.. Level: 9. FRE: 92. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Scholars support this. Grad students can research it. Published work on blockchain and crypto is doubling in top journals annually. Big opportunities await. Cryptocurrencies are different.. Level: 5. FRE: 54. Total words: 33. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 57.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Academic interest in this field is high. Grad students can explore this for research topics. The number of papers on cryptocurrency and blockchain in notable journals is doubling each year. There are many opportunities. Cryptocurrencies are not standard currencies.. Level: 4. FRE: 44. Total words: 39. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 69.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Academia is highly interested in this. Grad students can research it. Papers on cryptocurrencies and blockchain in top venues increase every year. Opportunities are plentiful. Cryptocurrencies are unlike regular currencies.. Level: 3. FRE: 36. Total words: 37. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 71.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Academic interest grows in this area. Grad students may find research topics here. The number of papers on cryptocurrency and blockchain doubles annually in top academic venues. Numerous opportunities exist. Crypto is not standard money.. Level: 2. FRE: 28. Total words: 40. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 84.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Academia embraces this topic. Grad students can research it. Scholarly papers on blockchain and cryptocurrency are doubling yearly in top journals. There's much opportunity. Cryptocurrencies differ from traditional currencies.. Level: 1. FRE: 19. Total words: 34. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 72.
Original sentence: And academia is really embracing this topic. So if any of you are graduate students who are looking for an area in which to do research, I think basically the number of papers published on cryptocurrencies and blockchain technology in respected academic venues is doubling every year. So there's huge opportunity here. So cryptocurrencies are not regular currencies.. Summary: Academia is excited about this. Grad students can look into it. Academic papers on blockchain and crypto in top venues double each year. There is big potential. Cryptocurrencies are not like normal money.. Level: 7. FRE: 75. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 43.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: These aren't currencies like dollars or euros. Bitcoin is very different, created from nothing. What does creating a crypto mean? Level: 9. FRE: 91.81. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: Unlike dollars or euros, Bitcoins are different, made from scratch. What does crypto creation involve? Level: 8. FRE: 89.96. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: Bitcoin isn't traditional money like dollars or euros. It's unique, made from nothing. What is crypto creation? Level: 7. FRE: 79.2. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: Bitcoins are not like dollars or euros. They are different, made from nothing. What does creating crypto mean? Level: 6. FRE: 74.14. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: Bitcoins are unlike dollars or euros. They are unique, created from nowhere. What is making crypto? Level: 5. FRE: 69.82. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: Bitcoins are not similar to euros or pounds. They are created differently. How is a crypto made? Level: 4. FRE: 61.55. Total words: 15. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: Unlike traditional money like euros, bitcoins are made differently. What does creating crypto mean? Level: 3. FRE: 47.91. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: Bitcoins aren't like pounds or euros. They are different. What does it mean to make crypto? Level: 2. FRE: 25.85. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: They're not a dollar or a pound or a euro, what we normally think of as currency. There's something different. Bitcoin was sort of created out of nowhere. And what does it mean to create a crypto? Summary: Bitcoins are not dollars or euros. They are different. How is crypto made? Level: 1. FRE: 18.29. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 17.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: Looking at this image, it is surprising how we can recognize emotions and capture a positive atmosphere, even though we know nothing about these people.. Level: 1. FRE: 11. Total words: 33. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 45.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: By looking at this picture, we can recognize emotions and perceive a positive atmosphere even without knowing the people.. Level: 2. FRE: 24. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: Viewing this image, we can recognize emotions and feel a positive atmosphere, despite knowing nothing about the people.. Level: 3. FRE: 32. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: This picture shows how we can recognize emotions and see a positive atmosphere without knowing the people.. Level: 4. FRE: 43. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: This image shows our ability to recognize emotions and notice a positive atmosphere without knowing the people.. Level: 5. FRE: 54. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: This image reveals our ability to recognize emotions and sense a positive atmosphere.. Level: 6. FRE: 64. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: This image displays our skill to recognize emotions and feel a positive atmosphere.. Level: 7. FRE: 73. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: This picture shows our ability to sense emotions and to see a positive atmosphere.. Level: 8. FRE: 85. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 17.
Original sentence: And I'm going to start by showing you this picture because I want to highlight how remarkable is our ability to recognize emotions, our human ability to recognize emotions. So when you look at this image, for instance, we don't know anything about these people, but we can capture a lot of things about the atmosphere, right? We see like a positive atmosphere and these people seem to be engaged and seem to be connecting on something. All of that is emotional information that we can capture just with one image.. Summary: This photo shows our ability to recognize emotions and feel a positive atmosphere.. Level: 9. FRE: 92. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: We have this remarkable capacity for recognizing emotions. Summary: Our remarkable ability to recognize emotions is useful. Level: 9. FRE: 94.2. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: Why is this capacity useful for us? Summary: How does this ability help us? Level: 9. FRE: 100.0. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 7.
Original sentence: It's very important in our social interactions. Summary: It's crucial for our social interactions. Level: 8. FRE: 88.5. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 13.
Original sentence: When we interact with people, we are constantly making guesses about how others feel in order to adapt the way we communicate to others' emotions. Summary: In interactions, we guess others' feelings to adjust communication. Level: 6. FRE: 69.0. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: We have this remarkable capacity for recognizing emotions. Summary: We can recognize emotions well. Level: 7. FRE: 82.9. Total words: 5. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 9.
Original sentence: Why is this capacity useful for us? Summary: Why is emotion recognition useful? Level: 7. FRE: 80.0. Total words: 5. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 10.
Original sentence: It's very important in our social interactions. Summary: This is important in social interactions. Level: 8. FRE: 87.3. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: When we interact with people, we are constantly making guesses about how others feel in order to adapt the way we communicate to others' emotions. Summary: While interacting, we guess feelings to adjust communication. Level: 6. FRE: 67.8. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: We have this remarkable capacity for recognizing emotions. Summary: We have the ability to recognize others' emotions. Level: 6. FRE: 65.5. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: Why is this capacity useful for us? Summary: Why is it helpful to recognize emotions? Level: 7. FRE: 78.4. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: Determining people's needs and predicting reactions is essential. Emotions are crucial as they influence cognitive processes, attention, memory, and learning. Level: 9. FRE: 91.8. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: Identifying needs and predicting reactions is necessary. Emotions greatly impact our lives affecting attention, memory, and learning. Level: 8. FRE: 82.4. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: Knowing needs and predicting reactions is vital. Emotions impact attention, memory, and learning processes. Level: 7. FRE: 75.2. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: It's crucial to detect needs and predict reactions. Emotions influence attention, memory, and learning processes. Level: 6. FRE: 67.4. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: Detecting needs and predicting reactions is important. Emotions affect attention, memory, and learning. Level: 5. FRE: 58.7. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: It is important to know needs and predict reactions. Emotions influence attention, memory, and learning. Level: 4. FRE: 48.4. Total words: 15. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: Detecting needs and predicting reactions are key. Emotions affect attention, memory, and learning. Level: 3. FRE: 39.7. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: Detecting needs and predicting reactions matter. Emotions shape attention, memory, and learning. Level: 2. FRE: 29.8. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: It's very important to detect people's needs as well, and also to predict people's reactions. And actually emotions are so important in our lives and have a strong influence in a lot of our cognitive processes. So for instance, they modulate our attention mechanisms and they strongly influence our memory and also our learning process. So emotions are so important in our lives. Summary: Knowing needs and reactions is vital. Emotions impact attention, memory, and learning. Level: 1. FRE: 18.2. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: Suppose you think about future AI. Who has seen these movies? Most of you have. Machines in the future might have emotions. Emotions are complex. Level: 1. FRE: 19.4. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: Most of you have seen movies about future AI. Machines can show emotions, but emotions are complex. Level: 2. FRE: 23.5. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: Future AI might have emotional intelligence. But, emotions are complicated, right? Level: 3. FRE: 35.6. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: We imagine future AI with emotions. Most movies show this, but emotions are complex. Level: 4. FRE: 42.5. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: Imagine future AI with emotions. You've seen movies about it. Emotions are complex. Level: 5. FRE: 56.9. Total words: 15. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: Future AI might have emotions. No spoilers, but emotions are complex. Level: 6. FRE: 62.1. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: Many of you have seen movies about future AI. Future machines may feel emotions, but emotions are complex. Level: 7. FRE: 72.1. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: Most of you have seen future AI movies. Future AI will have emotions, which are complex. Level: 8. FRE: 80.6. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: We imagine the AI of the future, so I'm going to ask how many of you have seen at least one of these movies here? So most of you have seen at least one of these movies. So you know what I said, I'm not going to make any spoiler, but you know what I'm saying when I say that the machines that we imagine in the future, all of them have some kind of emotional intelligence. But on the other side, emotions are so complex, right? Summary: Future AI may have emotions. They are complex. Level: 9. FRE: 91.5. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 15.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: Understanding others' feelings is often hard even for us, so it's even more difficult for machines. Level: 1. FRE: 17.3. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: It is difficult to know others' feelings, even for us, making it very complex for machines. Level: 2. FRE: 24.7. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: Knowing how others feel is difficult for humans, and even more complex for machines. Level: 3. FRE: 37.9. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: We struggle to understand feelings, making it harder for machines to do the same. Level: 4. FRE: 43.5. Total words: 15. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: It's tough for us to know feelings, so it's harder for machines to do it. Level: 5. FRE: 55.8. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: It's hard for us to know feelings, so it's harder for machines. Level: 6. FRE: 62.3. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 17.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: It is hard for us to know feelings, so it is harder for machines. Level: 7. FRE: 70.4. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: We find it hard to know feelings, so it is harder for machines. Level: 8. FRE: 81.2. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 15.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: It's hard for us to know feelings; it's harder for machines. Level: 9. FRE: 93.8. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 13.
Original sentence: Even for us sometimes it's difficult to know how others feel. We can grasp some information about the upper and emotional states of people, but it's complex sometimes to know how others feel or even how we feel. So how can machines do something that complex? Well, the thing is that when our emotions change, there are a lot of things that change in our body. Summary: It's hard for us to know feelings; it's difficult for machines. Level: 10. FRE: 90.2. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: When nervous, our heart rate and respiration rate increase. We sweat, and our skin's electrodermal activity changes. Our facial expression, gaze, and pupil change. Blood pressure and body posture vary as well. We use different gestures and our voice, writing, and typing can change too. Level: 9. FRE: 90. Total words: 46. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 73.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: Nervousness increases heart and respiration rates, sweat, and changes in skin electrodermal activity. Facial expressions, gaze patterns, pupils, blood pressure, and body posture also change. Gestures, voice, writing, and typing vary. Level: 8. FRE: 80. Total words: 35. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 62.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: When nervous, heart and breathing rates rise. We sweat, our skin's electrodermal activity changes. Expressions and gaze shift, pupils, blood pressure, and posture alter. Gestures, voice, and writing vary too. Level: 7. FRE: 75. Total words: 36. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 67.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: Nervousness makes heart and breath rates rise, we sweat, and skin activity shifts. Faces, gazes, pupils, blood pressure, and body postures change. Gestures, voice, and writing vary. Level: 6. FRE: 65. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 57.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: When we're nervous, heart rate and breathing go up. We sweat a lot, facial expressions and gazes change. Pupils, blood pressure, posture shift. Gestures, voice, and writing also change. Level: 5. FRE: 55. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 52.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: Being nervous boosts heart and breath rates. We sweat and facial expressions change. Gazes, pupils, and body postures shift. Gestures and voices vary. Level: 4. FRE: 45. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 44.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: Nervous people see increased heart and breath rates. There's more sweat and changing expressions. Gazes and pupils shift. Body posture, gestures, and voices vary. Level: 3. FRE: 35. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 7. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: Nervousness raises heart rate. We breathe harder, sweat more. Our faces and gazes change. Pupils, posture vary. Gestures shift too. Level: 2. FRE: 25. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 6. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: So for instance, when we are nervous, usually our heart rate increases, also our respiration rate increases, we sweat, so the electrodermal activity in our skin also changes. Our facial expression changes, our gaze patterns change, our pupil changes as well, our blood pressure, and we have different body postures. We use different gestures depending on how we feel. Our voice can change as well, the way we write, the way we type in our phones, for instance.. Summary: When nervous, heart rate rises, breathing increases. We sweat and faces change. Pupils and gestures vary. Level: 1. FRE: 15. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Emotion-related signals vary and can be captured by sensors. We can label and analyze this data to find patterns and develop algorithms to recognize emotions. Level: 9. FRE: 91.11. Total words: 33. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 45.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Various signals change with emotions and can be captured with sensors. Labeled data helps find patterns to develop emotion-recognition systems. Level: 8. FRE: 82.51. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Emotions cause many signals, which sensors can capture. Labeled data allows pattern recognition for emotion-detecting systems. Level: 7. FRE: 74.61. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Emotions produce different signals captured by sensors. With labeled data, patterns help develop systems to recognize these emotions. Level: 6. FRE: 65.33. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Sensors capture signals that alter with emotions. Labeled data helps identify patterns for emotion-recognition algorithms. Level: 5. FRE: 55.72. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 35.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Emotional signals are captured by sensors. Labeled data helps find patterns to create emotion-detecting systems. Level: 4. FRE: 44.24. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Sensors capture emotion signals. Labeled data finds patterns for developing emotion-recognition systems. Level: 3. FRE: 32.83. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Sensors can gather signals that change with emotions. Then, labeled data can be used to find patterns and develop systems to recognize emotions. Level: 2. FRE: 22.95. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 45.
Original sentence: So there are a lot of signals that change with our emotions. So what we can do is all of these signals can be captured with different types of sensors. And then we capture these signals, and if we have data, label data with emotions, What we can do is we can try to find patterns in these signals that correlate with emotions and develop machine learning algorithms or systems that can recognize the emotions using this type of information. The same way we process other type of information. Summary: Signals changing with emotions are captured by sensors. Labeled data aids in finding patterns to develop emotion-recognition systems. Level: 1. FRE: 10.96. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: Discussing emotional data capture through vision modality, starting with cameras.. Level: 9. FRE: 92.8. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: I will explain capturing emotions using vision. Start with cameras.. Level: 8. FRE: 83.8. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: Let's capture emotional data with vision—particularly cameras.. Level: 7. FRE: 72.6. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: Discussing how to capture emotion through vision, starting with cameras.. Level: 6. FRE: 61.2. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: Examining capture of emotional data. Focus on vision modality, especially cameras.. Level: 5. FRE: 53.6. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: We begin with capturing emotional data through vision. Use cameras first.. Level: 4. FRE: 46.8. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: Focus initially on capturing emotional information. Start with vision modality using cameras.. Level: 3. FRE: 36.7. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: We'll begin by examining how to capture emotional information using the vision modality, specifically with the help of cameras.. Level: 2. FRE: 28.9. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: I'm going to focus first on the, so I'm going to talk about some examples of how can we capture this emotional information. And I'm going to start with vision modality, which is one of my areas of expertise. So visual modality, cameras. What has been done so far for recognizing emotions from information captured by cameras?. Summary: To start, let's focus on various ways we can capture emotional information, with an emphasis on the vision modality, utilizing cameras to recognize emotions from the data they collect.. Level: 1. FRE: 17.5. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 46.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: What’s the top research in computer vision for recognizing emotions? Facial expression is most common. I finished my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 1. FRE: 18. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: What’s the leading research for recognizing emotions in computer vision? Facial expressions are most used. I earned my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 2. FRE: 25. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: Do you know the main research for emotion recognition in computer vision? Facial expression is most common. I completed my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 3. FRE: 33. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: Could you tell me the popular research for recognizing emotions via computer vision? Facial expressions are usually used. I finished my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 4. FRE: 46. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 35.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: Do you know the key research for recognizing emotions using computer vision? Facial expressions are the common method. I got my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 5. FRE: 50. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: Can you identify the main research for emotion recognition in computer vision? Facial expressions are most common. I completed my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 6. FRE: 60. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: Do you know the main research for emotion recognition in computer vision? The common method uses facial expressions. I earned my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 7. FRE: 71. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: Any idea about the top research in computer vision for recognizing emotions? It often uses facial expressions. I got my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 8. FRE: 80. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 28.
Original sentence: Any idea? What's the most popular research from a computer vision perspective to recognize emotions? So facial expression is actually the most common approach to recognize emotions. So when I was doing my PhD, I finished like 10 years ago now. Summary: What is the popular research in computer vision for recognizing emotions? It mainly uses facial expressions. I got my PhD 10 years ago. Level: 9. FRE: 91. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: Solving the problem took a long time. Originally, the technology could not detect key facial points, but now commercial software like Affectiva can analyze facial expressions and match them to emotions. Level: 9. FRE: 90.2. Total words: 37. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 58.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: Initially, it was hard to detect key points in faces. After 10 years, software from Affectiva can recognize and match facial expressions to emotions accurately. Level: 8. FRE: 80.4. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: Detecting facial key points was difficult at first. Now, software like Affectiva's can accurately identify and relate facial expressions to emotions. Level: 7. FRE: 70.6. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: It was hard to detect key facial points initially. Now, Affectiva software can accurately match facial expressions to emotions. Level: 6. FRE: 60.3. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: Finding facial key points was hard initially. Now, Affectiva software can match expressions to emotions accurately. Level: 5. FRE: 50.1. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 28.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: Initially finding facial key points was hard. Now Affectiva software matches expressions to emotions precisely. Level: 4. FRE: 40.0. Total words: 15. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: At first, detecting key facial points was difficult. Now, Affectiva software links expressions to emotions. Level: 3. FRE: 30.1. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: Detecting facial points was initially hard. Now software by Affectiva matches expressions to emotions. Level: 2. FRE: 20.2. Total words: 15. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: And this was a completely unsolved problem. So I was working a little bit in this type of software, trying to recognize key points in the faces, working with images acquired under controlled environments, and nothing was working by then. So now after 10 years, we have these softwares that work very well in recognizing some of the key points on your face, tracking these key points, and doing some matching between the emotions, so the expressions that are observed and the possible emotions that they are expressing. This is an example of a commercial software from a company called Affectiva, where you see that the software detects your key points, analyzes the configuration, and makes some kind of correspondence between this expression and the possible emotion that you are expressing with the facial expression. Summary: Initially, it was hard to detect key points. Now Affectiva software matches expressions to emotions. Level: 1. FRE: 10.1. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: This software works well but struggles to detect correct emotions in real-world conditions. Level: 1. FRE: 14.01. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: The software detects patterns and key points well but struggles with emotions and fails in the wild. Level: 2. FRE: 24.65. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: This software is good at detecting patterns and points but struggles with emotions and fails in real-world use. Level: 3. FRE: 32.51. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: The software detects patterns and key points well but struggles with emotions and does not work in all conditions. Level: 4. FRE: 43.87. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: The software is good at detecting patterns and key points but struggles with emotions in real-world conditions. Level: 5. FRE: 51.02. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: This software detects patterns and key points well but struggles to recognize emotions accurately in every condition. Level: 6. FRE: 63.97. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: This software works well in tests but struggles to detect emotions accurately in every situation. Level: 7. FRE: 72.31. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: The software detects patterns and points well but struggles with emotions and fails in the wild. Level: 8. FRE: 83.75. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: This software works very well, so it's very well at detecting the patterns, it's very while detecting the key points, it's complicated to associate the correct emotion to an expression, a phase expression, but it works pretty well in some applications. It's being used for test users, for instance, but the problem of this software is that it does not work in the wild. So we would like to have machines that can recognize emotions in any condition. So, if we go back to this image that I showed you before, what happens when we run this type of software here?. Summary: The software detects patterns well but struggles to recognize emotions in real-life situations. Level: 9. FRE: 91.05. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: We use commercial software to detect the woman's face, key points, and her happiness with confidence, along with attention detection. However, the system doesn't work for him. Level: 9. FRE: 90.5. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 49.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: Using commercial software, we can detect a woman's face, key points, and happiness from her smile with high confidence. It also detects attention accurately, but for him, the system fails. Level: 8. FRE: 85.0. Total words: 34. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 54.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: By using commercial software, we accurately detect a woman's face, key points, happiness from a smile, and attention. For him, though, the system does not work. Level: 7. FRE: 79.4. Total words: 33. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 54.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: The commercial software detects the woman's face, key points, and happiness from her smile with strong confidence. It accurately detects attention. For him, though, it fails. Level: 6. FRE: 73.3. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 52.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: This commercial software can detect the woman's face, key points, and happiness due to her smile with high confidence. It also detects attention accurately. It doesn't work for him. Level: 5. FRE: 67.8. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 55.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: The commercial software detects the woman's face, key points, and her happiness from a smile, along with attention with strong confidence. However, for him, it does not work. Level: 4. FRE: 60.1. Total words: 34. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 58.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: We run commercial software to detect the woman's face, key points, and her emotion of happiness from her smile with strong confidence and attention. For him, though, the software fails. Level: 3. FRE: 49.8. Total words: 33. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 62.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: Using commercial software, we detect the woman's face, key points, and her happiness from her smile with confidence. It also detects attention accurately. However, for him, the detection fails. Level: 2. FRE: 28.4. Total words: 35. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 71.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: By running commercial software, we detect the face of a woman and her key points, with the software identifying her happiness due to a smile and detecting attention. The system fails for him. Level: 1. FRE: 19.6. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 68.
Original sentence: So if we run this type of commercial software, we can detect very well the face of this woman, we can detect the key points, and the software is answering in this case that this woman is feeling happiness because it detects a smile with a strong confidence, it detects attention. I don't know exactly how this detection of attention works here, but actually it's pretty accurate. But what happens with him? So what happens with him is that the system is not working. Summary: Running commercial software detects a woman's face, key points, and her happiness from a smile. It also detects attention but fails for him, and I am unsure how attention detection works, although it seems accurate. Level: 0. FRE: 9.3. Total words: 40. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 87.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: All face key points are not visible due to strong occlusions and highlights by glasses. It is a profile view, not frontal, hence not everything is visible. This software might not perform well in open environments with nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions. Level: 1. FRE: 14.9. Total words: 48. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 77.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: The problem is the face points are hidden. Glasses cause occlusions and highlights. It's a profile view, not frontal, obscuring visibility. Such software may fail with nonfrontal and occluded faces in open settings. Level: 2. FRE: 24.3. Total words: 41. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 53.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: There is a problem: face points are hidden. Glasses cause occlusions and highlights. It's a profile, not frontal view; visibility is reduced. Software may struggle with nonfrontal, occluded faces in open environments. Level: 3. FRE: 35.7. Total words: 40. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 47.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: Face points are hidden due to glasses. It's a profile view and visibility is reduced. Software may struggle with nonfrontal, occluded faces in open environments. Level: 4. FRE: 43.7. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: Face points are hidden due to glasses causing occlusions. It's a profile view, and visibility is reduced. Software may have issues with nonfrontal, occluded faces in open environments. Level: 5. FRE: 52.3. Total words: 33. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: Face points are hidden due to glasses causing occlusions. It's a profile view, reducing visibility. Software may have issues with nonfrontal, occluded faces. Level: 6. FRE: 61.7. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: Face points are hidden by glasses. It's a profile view, so visibility is reduced. Software may struggle with nonfrontal, occluded faces. Level: 7. FRE: 72.2. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: Face points are hidden due to glasses. It's a profile view, reducing visibility. Software may face issues with nonfrontal, occluded faces. Level: 8. FRE: 83.1. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: Face points are hidden by glasses. It's a profile view, reducing visibility. Software may struggle with occluded faces. Level: 9. FRE: 92.6. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: So here we have a problem and it's all the key points of the face are not actually visible. So we have strong occlusions and highlights because of the glasses of the person. And also we have a profile view, so it's not a frontal view anymore where everything is visible, right? So this type of software, when you run them in open environments, you face that when you have nonfrontal faces and partial occlusions, they might not work as well as we would like. Summary: Face points hidden by glasses. Profile view reduces visibility. Software may struggle. Level: 10. FRE: 98.6. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: The software detects surprise in the face. Level: 1. FRE: 11.0. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: Running the software, the face shows surprise. Level: 2. FRE: 23.4. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 10.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: The face looks surprised when analyzed by the software. Level: 3. FRE: 29.8. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: The software identifies a face showing surprise. Level: 4. FRE: 42.3. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 10.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: The program detects surprise in the face presented. Level: 5. FRE: 51.1. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: By running the software, the detected face shows surprise. Level: 6. FRE: 64.5. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 13.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: The software identifies the face as surprised. Level: 7. FRE: 75.2. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 10.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: The program says the face shows surprise. Level: 8. FRE: 84.6. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 9.
Original sentence: More problems. So here we have another example. Here is a face. If we run the software, it says, you see surprise. Summary: The software shows the face as surprised. Level: 9. FRE: 91.8. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 8.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: The mouth is open. We detect a typical look of surprise. But in context, it's not surprise. Instead, the face is tied to the action being performed.. Level: 9. FRE: 94.5. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: The mouth is open, showing a common surprise look. Context reveals it's not surprise. It's linked to an action.. Level: 8. FRE: 83.6. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: The open mouth looks like surprise, but context shows it's not. The face relates to an action.. Level: 7. FRE: 74.4. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: The mouth open look means surprise but context indicates it’s an action.. Level: 6. FRE: 63.5. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: An open mouth looks like surprise. But context shows it's an action.. Level: 5. FRE: 54.5. Total words: 15. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: Mouth open seems like surprise but it’s an action in context.. Level: 4. FRE: 44.3. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: Mouth open looks like surprise; actually, it’s an action.. Level: 3. FRE: 36.7. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 15.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: Mouth open looks like surprise, but it’s an act.. Level: 2. FRE: 25.4. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: The mouth is open. So it's detecting perfectly well a very prototypical expression of surprise. But when we look at the context, we realize that it's not surprise, right? So the thing is that this kit, we see a facial expression here but has nothing to do with the emotion, it's related to the action he is performing.. Summary: Open mouth seems like surprise. It’s an act.. Level: 1. FRE: 18.4. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 11.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Some facial expressions do not relate to emotions but other things. When speaking, facial expressions change often. It is unrelated to emotions. Another challenge is assigning correct emotions to isolated expressions. Level: 1. FRE: 19.19. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 47.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Facial expressions can be unrelated to emotions and involve other factors. Speaking alters facial expressions frequently, which is unrelated to emotions. Interpreting isolated expressions correctly is also difficult. Level: 2. FRE: 25.11. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 52.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Some facial expressions do not reflect emotions but other things. Facial expressions change often when talking, not tied to emotions. Correctly interpreting isolated expressions is hard. Level: 3. FRE: 30.77. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 43.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Some facial expressions are not emotional but related to other factors. Speaking involves changing expressions often, unrelated to emotions. Interpreting isolated expressions correctly is a challenge. Level: 4. FRE: 37.12. Total words: 29. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 48.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Facial expressions can be linked to things other than emotions. Talking changes expressions frequently and is not emotion-related. Another challenge is interpreting isolated expressions correctly. Level: 5. FRE: 44.85. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 45.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Some facial expressions aren't emotional but relate to other aspects. Talking often changes facial expressions, without involving emotions. Correctly interpreting isolated expressions is also challenging. Level: 6. FRE: 51.45. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 43.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Facial expressions can be related to factors other than emotions. When we talk, our expressions change often, not tied to emotions. Interpreting isolated expressions correctly is difficult. Level: 7. FRE: 60.26. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 39.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Some facial expressions aren't tied to emotions but other factors. Talking changes expressions frequently without involving emotions. Correctly interpreting isolated expressions is challenging. Level: 8. FRE: 72.34. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Facial expressions can be about other factors, not emotions. Talking changes facial expressions often and isn't emotional. It's hard to interpret isolated expressions correctly. Level: 9. FRE: 83.75. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: So some of our facial expressions have nothing to do with our emotions but with other things. For instance, when you talk, you change a lot your facial expression. It has nothing to do with your emotion. And another difficulty is giving the correct emotional meaning to an isolated facial expression.. Summary: Facial expressions can relate to non-emotional factors. Talking often changes our facial expressions, not linked to emotions. Correctly interpreting isolated expressions is tough. Level: 10. FRE: 94.87. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: So I'm going to show you some examples of experiments that were performed by psychologists that were studying what's the level of agreement in giving an emotional label to a specific facial expression, like here. Summary: Psychologists did experiments to study how people label facial expressions. Level: 9. FRE: 95.5. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: So here we see clearly a facial expression, but if I ask you, what's this facial expression communicating? Summary: We clearly see a facial expression here, but what does it communicate? Level: 8. FRE: 83.3. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: Well, you might think maybe anger, maybe contempt, this gas fear. Summary: You might think it's anger, contempt, or fear. Level: 7. FRE: 72.48. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: So usually people agree that this is a negative, valence emotion, but it's not clear what category. Summary: People usually agree it's a negative emotion, but the exact category is unclear. Level: 6. FRE: 63.16. Total words: 15. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: So I'm going to show you some examples of experiments that were performed by psychologists that were studying what's the level of agreement in giving an emotional label to a specific facial expression, like here. Summary: Psychologists studied how people agree on labeling facial expressions. Level: 5. FRE: 54.2. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: So here we see clearly a facial expression, but if I ask you, what's this facial expression communicating? Summary: Here we see a facial expression, but what does it mean? Level: 4. FRE: 42.92. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: Well, you might think maybe anger, maybe contempt, this gas fear. Summary: You might guess it's anger, contempt, or fear. Level: 3. FRE: 32.51. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 11.
Original sentence: So usually people agree that this is a negative, valence emotion, but it's not clear what category. Summary: People agree it's negative but not the exact kind. Level: 2. FRE: 27.6. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: So I'm going to show you some examples of experiments that were performed by psychologists that were studying what's the level of agreement in giving an emotional label to a specific facial expression, like here. Summary: Psychologists performed studies on how people label emotions in faces. Level: 1. FRE: 18.92. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: So here we see clearly a facial expression, but if I ask you, what's this facial expression communicating? Well, you might think maybe anger, maybe contempt, this gas fear. So usually people agree that this is a negative, valence emotion, but it's not clear what category. Summary: We see a face. It might show anger, contempt, or fear. People agree it's negative but are unsure which emotion. Level: 2. FRE: 30. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Context affects facial expression interpretation; they find disgust or anger based on context. Level: 1. FRE: 12.2. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Same face can look like disgust or anger depending on context. Level: 2. FRE: 24.1. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Context changes understanding of facial expressions like disgust or anger. Level: 3. FRE: 35.7. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: The same face may show disgust or anger depending on the context. Level: 4. FRE: 45.5. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Faces can look like disgust or anger based on the context. Level: 5. FRE: 55.9. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Context can make faces look happy, sad, or angry. Level: 6. FRE: 66.7. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Faces can be seen differently in different contexts. Level: 7. FRE: 75.1. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 13.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Faces change their meaning with context. Level: 8. FRE: 85.3. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 10.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Faces can look different with context. Level: 9. FRE: 90.1. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 9.
Original sentence: The thing is that if I give you some context suddenly, we probably will agree that this is disgust and this is what happens. People agree here that the face is disgust. But if you give you a different context, then people strongly agree that this is anger. So they have a lot of examples and they run a lot of experiments in using the exact same facial expression in different contexts. Summary: Context shows faces differently. Level: 10. FRE: 97.4. Total words: 5. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 7.
Original sentence: And they realize that the context strongly influences the way we perceive emotions. Summary: They see that context affects how we feel emotions. Level: 9. FRE: 94.2. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: So this is the motivation of one of the projects I'm working on that started here in Barcelona and now I'm still working on it in collaboration with the effective computing group at MIT media lab and the idea behind this project is okay, we know there's a lot of information in the face, that's true, but for developing machines that accurately recognize emotions, we can just rely on the face. Summary: This drives my project, which began in Barcelona and continues with MIT's effective computing group, focusing on emotion recognition beyond facial cues. Level: 5. FRE: 58.1. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 49.
Original sentence: We need to understand the context of the person and in particularly we are working in the scene context, in the situation of the person. Summary: We must understand the person's context, focusing on the scene and their situation. Level: 7. FRE: 77.6. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: And the interesting thing of working in this type of context is that suddenly you can say much more about the emotion. Summary: Working in context allows us to say much more about emotions. Level: 8. FRE: 85.5. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 17.
Original sentence: And they realize that the context strongly influences the way we perceive emotions. Summary: They understand that context has a strong impact on our perception of emotions. Level: 4. FRE: 48.9. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: So this is the motivation of one of the projects I'm working on that started here in Barcelona and now I'm still working on it in collaboration with the effective computing group at MIT media lab and the idea behind this project is okay, we know there's a lot of information in the face, that's true, but for developing machines that accurately recognize emotions, we can just rely on the face. Summary: This project, motivated by the influence of context on emotions, started in Barcelona and now involves MIT. Level: 3. FRE: 28.7. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: We need to understand the context of the person and in particularly we are working in the scene context, in the situation of the person. Summary: Understanding the person's scene context is crucial. Level: 6. FRE: 69.7. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: And the interesting thing of working in this type of context is that suddenly you can say much more about the emotion. Summary: Studying context teaches us more about emotions. Level: 8. FRE: 89.1. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: So this is the motivation of one of the projects I'm working on that started here in Barcelona and now I'm still working on it in collaboration with the effective computing group at MIT media lab and the idea behind this project is okay, we know there's a lot of information in the face, that's true, but for developing machines that accurately recognize emotions, we can just rely on the face. Summary: Context-driven emotion recognition project started in Barcelona and continues with MIT. Level: 2. FRE: 12.5. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: And they realize that the context strongly influences the way we perceive emotions. Summary: Context highly influences our emotion perception. Level: 7. FRE: 72.7. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 13.
Original sentence: So maybe with the expression, you can say something about basic emotions, but there are some secondary emotions or social emotions that are very interesting that if you don't see the context, you cannot say anything about them. Summary: Expressions reveal basic emotions, but not complex ones without context. Level: 9. FRE: 94.2. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 15.
Original sentence: Like here, once you see the context, you might say that this person is feeling confident. Summary: Context reveals confidence. Level: 9. FRE: 97.0. Total words: 4. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 6.
Original sentence: When you define confidence as feeling of being certain, conviction that an outcome will be favorable, encouraged, or proud. Summary: Confidence is feeling certain and positive about outcomes. Level: 6. FRE: 65.9. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: So that's the idea of the emotion recognition in context project. Summary: This is the goal of the emotion recognition project. Level: 6. FRE: 64.9. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 15.
Original sentence: So maybe with the expression, you can say something about basic emotions, but there are some secondary emotions or social emotions that are very interesting that if you don't see the context, you cannot say anything about them. Summary: Expressions alone show basic emotions; context is needed for complex ones. Level: 5. FRE: 50.0. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: There are some secondary emotions or social emotions that are very interesting that if you don't see the context, you cannot say anything about them. Summary: Without context, secondary emotions can't be identified. Level: 7. FRE: 73.5. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 15.
Original sentence: You cannot say anything about these secondary emotions or social emotions without the context. Summary: Secondary and social emotions need context. Level: 8. FRE: 88.2. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: When you define confidence as feeling of being certain, conviction that an outcome will be favorable, encouraged, or proud. Summary: Confidence means certainty and belief in positive results. Level: 5. FRE: 56.2. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 17.
Original sentence: Once you see the context, you might say that this person is confident. Summary: Context shows if someone is confident. Level: 8. FRE: 81.2. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: Confidence is defined as feeling of being certain, conviction that an outcome will be favorable, encouraged, or proud. Summary: Confidence is being certain and positive about outcomes. Level: 4. FRE: 40.5. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: We aim to recognize emotions from images by considering not just the face but also the person's context. The best approach in computer vision is using deep learning models. Our idea is to apply deep learning to this problem, but our challenge is the lack of training data because most emotion recognition research focuses on the face. Level: 1. FRE: 12.1. Total words: 57. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 104.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: We wish to recognize emotions from images by analyzing faces and context using deep learning. The main challenge is the lack of training data focused on the entire context, not just the face. Level: 2. FRE: 25.3. Total words: 42. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 70.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: For emotion recognition, we need images that include context and faces. Deep learning models work best, but we lack training data. Level: 3. FRE: 33.0. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: We aim to recognize emotions using images with context and faces. Deep learning is the best method, but we lack training data. Level: 4. FRE: 44.2. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: We want to recognize emotions by looking at faces and context in images. Deep learning is the best approach, but we lack training data. Level: 5. FRE: 55.4. Total words: 29. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: We aim to recognize emotions using images by considering faces and context. Deep learning is best, but we lack data. Level: 6. FRE: 68.3. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: We seek to recognize emotions from images by examining faces and context. Deep learning is ideal, but we need data. Level: 7. FRE: 77.6. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: We want to use images to recognize emotions from faces and context. Deep learning works best, but we need data. Level: 8. FRE: 89.5. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: So what we want to do is we want to go from images like this one, so not just relating on the face and looking also at the context of the person, trying to recognize emotions, and for that, so this is a computer vision project. We know that in computer vision nowadays what is working best is deep learning models. So our idea was, okay, let's try to model this problem using deep learning. So first challenge that we faced, we didn't have any training data, of course, because as we said before, usually all the research on emotion recognition from images was focused on the face, so we didn't have any data set where we could see people in their context. Summary: We want to use images to recognize emotions from faces and context. Deep learning is best, but we lack data. Level: 9. FRE: 90.3. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We collected images, some from search engines and some from labeled public data sets. We created annotation interfaces for these images of people in various situations. Level: 1. FRE: 14.33. Total words: 29. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We gathered many images from search engines and public data sets. These images were annotated using custom interfaces. Level: 2. FRE: 25.3. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 28.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We collected images from different sources and created annotation tools. Level: 3. FRE: 36.15. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We gathered images from various places and made annotation tools. Level: 4. FRE: 47.19. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We collected images from search engines and public datasets, then annotated them. Level: 5. FRE: 56.9. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We gathered images and annotated them. Level: 6. FRE: 65.7. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We collected and annotated images. Level: 7. FRE: 75.7. Total words: 5. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 10.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We collected images. Level: 8. FRE: 85.2. Total words: 3. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 6.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We gathered pictures. Level: 9. FRE: 92.7. Total words: 3. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 5.
Original sentence: So we were collecting a lot of images. Some of them were manually downloaded from search engines like Google, and other images came from public data sets that were already labeled with the bounding box of the person. And the images we collected are images like the ones that you see here, so people doing different things in very different situations. And what we did is we created annotation interfaces like this one that I'm showing you here. Summary: We collected photos. Level: 10. FRE: 100. Total words: 3. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 4.
Original sentence: So where we asked annotators to label what emotion category they thought this person was expressing in this specific situation. Summary: We asked annotators to specify the emotion category expressed in the given scenario. Level: 9. FRE: 92.5. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: We had two different interfaces. Summary: We used two different interfaces. Level: 9. FRE: 91.8. Total words: 5. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 7.
Original sentence: This is the one of emotion categories. Summary: This interface is for emotion categories. Level: 9. FRE: 82.7. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: And we have another one for continuous dimensions. Summary: We also have an interface for continuous dimensions. Level: 9. FRE: 70.4. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: So where we asked annotators to label what emotion category they thought this person was expressing in this specific situation. Summary: Annotators were asked to label the emotion shown in this specific case. Level: 8. FRE: 63.3. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: We had two different interfaces. Summary: Two interfaces were used. Level: 9. FRE: 78.3. Total words: 4. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 9.
Original sentence: This is the one of emotion categories. Summary: One interface is for emotion categories. Level: 9. FRE: 83.5. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: And we have another one for continuous dimensions. Summary: Another interface is for continuous dimensions. Level: 8. FRE: 62.1. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: So where we asked annotators to label what emotion category they thought this person was expressing in this specific situation. Summary: We asked annotators to identify the emotion expressed in this specific situation. Level: 7. FRE: 57.5. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: And we have another one for continuous dimensions. Summary: Another interface analyzes continuous dimensions. Level: 7. FRE: 51.3. Total words: 5. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: Machines can represent emotions in various ways; categories are common, and emotional dimensions are less so. Continuous dimensions label emotions by valence, indicating positive or negative feelings. Level: 1. FRE: 19.3. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 43.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: Emotions in machines can be represented in different ways. Categories are common; emotional dimensions are less so, labeling feelings as positive or negative via valence. Level: 2. FRE: 29.1. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: Machines represent emotions in different ways: categories are common, and emotional dimensions are less so, using valence to label as positive or negative. Level: 3. FRE: 40.2. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: Emotions in machines are represented in different ways. Categories, a common method, and emotional dimensions, label feelings as positive or negative based on valence. Level: 4. FRE: 49.8. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: There are different ways to represent emotions in machines. The common method is categories, while emotional dimensions use valence to show positive or negative feelings. Level: 5. FRE: 57. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: Machines can show emotions in varied ways. Categories are common; emotional dimensions, less used, label feelings as positive or negative through valence. Level: 6. FRE: 62.5. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: Machines express emotions in different ways: common categories and less common emotional dimensions, which use valence to label positive or negative feelings. Level: 7. FRE: 72.1. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: Machines represent emotions with common categories and less common emotional dimensions, which assess feelings as positive or negative through valence. Level: 8. FRE: 82.5. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 28.
Original sentence: So there are different ways of representing emotions in a machine. Categories is one of the most common and emotional dimensions is the other one. Maybe it's less popular. But the idea of the continuous dimensions is to label according to valence, which is is a dimension that just measures whether someone is feeling something positive or something negative. Summary: Machines show emotions in categories or emotional dimensions, the latter using valence to label feelings as positive or negative. Level: 9. FRE: 91.2. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal measures if someone is calm or agitated, while dominance measures if they feel in control or dominated. We also gathered demographics like gender and age, using cloud sourcing for annotations. Level: 9. FRE: 90. Total words: 35. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 51.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal shows if someone is calm or agitated, and dominance shows if they feel controlled or in control. We gathered gender and age data with cloud sourcing. Level: 8. FRE: 81. Total words: 34. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 48.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal checks if someone is calm or agitated, and dominance checks if they feel controlled or dominant. We also gathered gender and age using cloud sourcing. Level: 7. FRE: 73. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 45.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal measures if a person is calm or agitated. Dominance measures if they feel controlled. We also collected gender and age data via cloud sourcing. Level: 6. FRE: 63. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 50.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal measures calmness or agitation. Dominance measures control. We collected demographics like gender and age using cloud sourcing. Level: 5. FRE: 54. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal shows if calm or agitated. Dominance shows if controlled or in control. We got demographics like gender and age via cloud sourcing. Level: 4. FRE: 45. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal assesses calmness or agitation. Dominance assesses if a person is controlled or in control. We gathered demographics like gender and age. Level: 3. FRE: 35. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal checks calmness or agitation. Dominance checks feeling controlled or in control. Demographics, including gender and age, are also collected. Level: 2. FRE: 27. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 44.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal measures calmness or agitation; dominance shows control. Demographics like gender and age were gathered too. Level: 1. FRE: 16. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: A rousal is measuring whether someone is in calm or very ready to act, very agitated. And then dominance that is measuring whether someone is feeling dominated by the situation or the opposite is that someone is feeling in control of the situation. And then we also collected some demographics of the person in the picture, like the gender or the estimated age. And we use cloud sourcing for collecting all of these annotations. Summary: Arousal measures calmness or agitation, dominance measures control. Demographics like gender and age were also collected. Level: 1. FRE: 16. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: In particular, we use the platform Amazon Mechanical Turk. And after this process, we came up with what we call the emoric data set, which is a collection of these images, 23,000 annotated images, 34,000 annotated people. Because for some images, we have multiple people annotated. Summary: We use Amazon Mechanical Turk to create the emoric data set with 23,000 images and 34,000 people. Level: 9. FRE: 94.93310000000001. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: I'm going to show you a little bit about the deep learning model that we developed as a baseline to model this problem. Summary: We will show a deep learning model developed to address this problem. Level: 8. FRE: 80.3. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: In particular, we use the platform Amazon Mechanical Turk. And after this process, we came up with what we call the emoric data set, which is a collection of these images, 23,000 annotated images, 34,000 annotated people. Because for some images, we have multiple people annotated. Summary: Amazon Mechanical Turk helped us create the emoric data set of 23,000 images and 34,000 people. Level: 7. FRE: 72.83700000000002. Total words: 17. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: I'm going to show you a little bit about the deep learning model that we developed as a baseline to model this problem. Summary: This is about a model we made to solve this problem. Level: 6. FRE: 63.97800000000002. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: In particular, we use the platform Amazon Mechanical Turk. And after this process, we came up with what we call the emoric data set, which is a collection of these images, 23,000 annotated images, 34,000 annotated people. Because for some images, we have multiple people annotated. Summary: Using Amazon Mechanical Turk, we developed the emoric data set with 23,000 images and 34,000 people. Level: 5. FRE: 52.41000000000002. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 35.
Original sentence: I'm going to show you a little bit about the deep learning model that we developed as a baseline to model this problem. Summary: Our baseline model for this problem will now be shown. Level: 4. FRE: 43.523. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: In particular, we use the platform Amazon Mechanical Turk. And after this process, we came up with what we call the emoric data set, which is a collection of these images, 23,000 annotated images, 34,000 annotated people. Because for some images, we have multiple people annotated. Summary: Amazon Mechanical Turk was used to develop the emoric data set with 23,000 images, 34,000 people, and multiple annotations per image. Level: 3. FRE: 32.659000000000006. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 46.
Original sentence: I'm going to show you a little bit about the deep learning model that we developed as a baseline to model this problem. Summary: We will discuss the baseline deep learning model developed to address this issue. Level: 2. FRE: 25.284. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: In particular, we use the platform Amazon Mechanical Turk. And after this process, we came up with what we call the emoric data set, which is a collection of these images, 23,000 annotated images, 34,000 annotated people. Because for some images, we have multiple people annotated. Summary: We created the emoric data set using Amazon Mechanical Turk, including 23,000 images and 34,000 people with multiple annotations per image. Level: 1. FRE: 16.428000000000008. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 52.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: It is a simple model. It represents the architecture. We input the image and know the target's location. A module extracts person features. Level: 9. FRE: 98.97. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: We made a simple model. The architecture is shown. We input the image and know the target's location. One module extracts features. Level: 8. FRE: 86.07. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 5. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: Our model is simple. The architecture shows it clearly. We input the image and know the target person’s location. A module extracts person features. Level: 7. FRE: 79.18. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: Our model is quite simple, and this is the architectural representation. We input the image and know the location of the target person. A module extracts the features of that person. Level: 6. FRE: 70.2. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 47.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: Our model is simple, as shown by the architecture. We input an image and know the target person's location. Then, one module extracts the person's features. Level: 5. FRE: 60.65. Total words: 33. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 49.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: The model we created is simple. It is represented by the architecture. We input an image and know the target's location. A module extracts the target's features. Level: 4. FRE: 50.92. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 48.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: The model is simple in nature. This architecture represents it. We input an image and find the location of the target person. One module extracts features from the target. Level: 3. FRE: 40.76. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 51.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: The model we developed is described as simple. The provided architecture represents it. An image is used as input, revealing the target person's location. A module then extracts the person's features. Level: 2. FRE: 30.37. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 61.
Original sentence: So what we did, it's a very simple model. This is the representation of the architecture. So basically, we have as input the image, and we know the location of the target person that we are trying to recognize the emotion of. And then we have one module that is extracting person features. Summary: What we did was create a model that is very straightforward. This image represents the architecture. We input an image and can identify the location of the target person whose emotions we want to recognize. Then, a module extracts features specific to the person. Level: 1. FRE: 19.64. Total words: 43. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 69.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: We use a fully convolutional network to extract features from the bounding box and the whole image, then merge them with one fully connected layer. Level: 9. FRE: 91. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 47.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: We use a fully convolutional network to gather features of the person and the whole image, then combine them with one fully connected layer. Level: 8. FRE: 81. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 50.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: We extract features from the bounding box and the whole image using a fully convolutional network, then merge them with a connected layer. Level: 7. FRE: 71. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 54.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: We use a fully convolutional network to gather features of the bounding box and context, then use one connected layer to merge them. Level: 6. FRE: 65. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: Features are extracted from the bounding box and context using a fully convolutional network, then combined using a connected layer. Level: 5. FRE: 55. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: We extract features from the bounding box and image context using a convolutional network, then merge them with a connected layer. Level: 4. FRE: 49. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 44.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: Using a fully convolutional network, we get features from the bounding box and context, then combine them with a connected layer. Level: 3. FRE: 32. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 44.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: We extract features of the bounding box and context using a convolutional network, and merge them with a connected layer. Level: 2. FRE: 28. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: Features are extracted from the box and context using a convolutional network, then they are combined and connected. Level: 1. FRE: 20. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: So it's fully convolutional and we extract features of the bounding box containing the person. And then we have another module which is the context features that takes as an input the whole image and extract also enough using a fully convolutional network features about the context. And then we merge these features. We have one fully connected layer. Summary: We take features from the bounding box and context using a convolutional network, then combine them into one connected layer. Level: 1. FRE: 19. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 44.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We distinguish balance, land dominance, and emotion categories. The regression loss function models our data best. Here are the results and images we obtain. Level: 9. FRE: 91.1. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We identify balance, land dominance, and emotions differently. Regression loss functions fit our data best based on our tests. Here are our results and images. Level: 8. FRE: 85.4. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We categorize balance, land dominance, and emotions. Regression loss functions work best for our data, based on our experiments. These are the results and images. Level: 7. FRE: 73.2. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We separate balance, land dominance, and emotion recognition. Our experiments showed that regression loss functions model our data best. Here are the results and images. Level: 6. FRE: 65.7. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 39.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We distinguish balance, land dominance, and emotion categories separately. Regression loss functions were best for our data modeling. These are the results and images obtained. Level: 5. FRE: 56.3. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 43.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We differentiate the recognition of balance, land dominance, and emotional categories. Based on experiments, regression loss functions suit our data best. These are the derived results and images. Level: 4. FRE: 49. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 45.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We separate the recognition of balance, land dominance, and emotion categories. Our experiments found regression loss functions the most suitable for data modeling. These are the results and images produced. Level: 3. FRE: 39.2. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 49.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We differentiate the recognition of balance, land dominance, and emotion categories. According to our experiments, regression loss functions model our data optimally. We obtain these results and images. Level: 2. FRE: 28.7. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 56.
Original sentence: And we separate the recognition of balance, and also land dominance, and the emotion categories. And the type of loss function that we use is regression, because from our experiments, we saw that it was the best way to model our data. So these are the type of results that we get. So these are the type of images that we get.. Summary: We distinguish balance, land dominance, and emotion categories. Based on our experiments, regression loss functions are optimal for modeling our data. These results and images are produced. Level: 1. FRE: 15.8. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 58.
Original sentence: This is recognition of anticipation, excitement, engagement, and confidence in this case. Summary: This shows awareness of excitement and engagement here. Level: 9. FRE: 92.2. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 15.
Original sentence: This is another example of recognition, pleasure, happiness, and affection in this other picture. Summary: Here is another example of recognizing happiness and pleasure. Level: 8. FRE: 87.7. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: Another one pretty challenging that here is, it recognized happiness, the system, but here you don't see the face. Summary: It's challenging, but it recognized happiness without seeing the face. Level: 7. FRE: 75.5. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: So clearly somehow it's extracting some information about the context and the situation. Summary: It clearly gets some details about the situation. Level: 9. FRE: 90.9. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: This is recognition of anticipation, excitement, engagement, and confidence in this case. Summary: It recognizes anticipation and confidence here. Level: 8. FRE: 85.4. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: This is another example of recognition, pleasure, happiness, and affection in this other picture. Summary: Here is another example of recognizing joy and affection. Level: 7. FRE: 79.0. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: Another one pretty challenging that here is, it recognized happiness, the system, but here you don't see the face. Summary: It was tough, but it saw happiness even without a face. Level: 6. FRE: 67.5. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: So clearly somehow it's extracting some information about the context and the situation. Summary: It's clearly pulling information from the context. Level: 7. FRE: 76.2. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: This is recognition of anticipation, excitement, engagement, and confidence in this case. Summary: This shows recognition of excitement and confidence here. Level: 8. FRE: 80.3. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: This is another example of recognition, pleasure, happiness, and affection in this other picture. Summary: This image also shows recognition of joy and affection. Level: 7. FRE: 73.8. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: Here another interesting example where for this guy, and the recognition of emotions was like pleasure, affection and happiness, but for the other person, it was like a mess, so it recognized almost everything possible, and so this is showing that not all the information is coming just from the context, but it's the combination of the context and the person which actually creates the output. Summary: Here is another example: for one person, emotion recognition felt like pleasure, affection, and happiness, but for another, it was chaotic and identified almost everything possible, demonstrating that the output depends on both context and person. Level: 1. FRE: 18. Total words: 53. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 79.
Original sentence: So the truth is that this system is not working very well, so this is the first attempt in trying to recognize emotions using not just face, but using person and situational context. Summary: The truth is that this system is not performing well, and this is the first attempt to recognize emotions using both facial and situational context. Level: 2. FRE: 26. Total words: 29. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: Here another interesting example where for this guy, and the recognition of emotions was like pleasure, affection and happiness, but for the other person, it was like a mess, so it recognized almost everything possible, and so this is showing that not all the information is coming just from the context, but it's the combination of the context and the person which actually creates the output. Summary: In one case, emotion recognition was pleasant and happy, but for another, it felt messy and recognized everything, indicating that both context and the person influence the output. Level: 3. FRE: 32. Total words: 37. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 58.
Original sentence: So the truth is that this system is not working very well, so this is the first attempt in trying to recognize emotions using not just face, but using person and situational context. Summary: The system is not functioning well, as this is the initial attempt at emotion recognition using face, person, and situational context. Level: 4. FRE: 40. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 39.
Original sentence: Here another interesting example where for this guy, and the recognition of emotions was like pleasure, affection and happiness, but for the other person, it was like a mess, so it recognized almost everything possible, and so this is showing that not all the information is coming just from the context, but it's the combination of the context and the person which actually creates the output. Summary: One person found emotion recognition as pleasant, while another saw it as chaotic, showing that both context and person affect the results. Level: 5. FRE: 46. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 44.
Original sentence: So the truth is that this system is not working very well, so this is the first attempt in trying to recognize emotions using not just face, but using person and situational context. Summary: This system is not very effective and it is the first try at recognizing emotions using face, person, and context. Level: 6. FRE: 54. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 35.
Original sentence: Here another interesting example where for this guy, and the recognition of emotions was like pleasure, affection and happiness, but for the other person, it was like a mess, so it recognized almost everything possible, and so this is showing that not all the information is coming just from the context, but it's the combination of the context and the person which actually creates the output. Summary: For one, emotion recognition felt happy, but for another, it was chaotic, showing that both context and person affect results. Level: 7. FRE: 64. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: So the truth is that this system is not working very well, so this is the first attempt in trying to recognize emotions using not just face, but using person and situational context. Summary: This system is not yet effective; it's the first effort to recognize emotions using face and situational context. Level: 8. FRE: 71. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: Here another interesting example where for this guy, and the recognition of emotions was like pleasure, affection and happiness, but for the other person, it was like a mess, so it recognized almost everything possible, and so this is showing that not all the information is coming just from the context, but it's the combination of the context and the person which actually creates the output. Summary: For one person, emotion recognition was pleasant, while for another, it was chaotic, showing that both context and person matter. Level: 9. FRE: 82. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: So the truth is that this system is not working very well, so this is the first attempt in trying to recognize emotions using not just face, but using person and situational context. Summary: This system is not working well; it's the first attempt to recognize emotions using face and context. Level: 10. FRE: 94. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: The Red House is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts. If you want to know more about it, you can Google its reviews. Here is a piece of one review. Level: 9. FRE: 91.9. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: Found in Cambridge, Massachusetts, the Red House restaurant has online reviews that provide details if you're interested. Here’s a snippet from one such review. Level: 8. FRE: 83.2. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: The Red House restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts has reviews online. If you're curious, you may find these useful. Here is a review excerpt. Level: 7. FRE: 72.6. Total words: 29. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 43.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: If you seek information about the Red House in Cambridge, Massachusetts, Google its reviews. Here is a snippet from a review. Level: 6. FRE: 65.1. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: The Red House restaurant is found in Cambridge, Massachusetts. If curious, you can read reviews online. Here's one. Level: 5. FRE: 55.8. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: In Cambridge, Massachusetts, the Red House restaurant has reviews online for new visitors. Check out this review. Level: 4. FRE: 49.5. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 32.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: The Red House in Cambridge, Massachusetts, has reviews online for new visitors. Focus on this review. Level: 3. FRE: 34.7. Total words: 21. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: Red House restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts has reviews online. Here's one. Level: 2. FRE: 26.1. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: So the Red House restaurant is a restaurant in Cambridge, Massachusetts in USA. So if you go to this restaurant and you never went to this restaurant and you want to know how this restaurant works, so you Google this restaurant and you get all of these reviews. So this is one example of a review of the Red House restaurant. Okay, so let's focus in a piece of this review. Summary: Red House, Cambridge, Massachusetts, has online reviews. Here’s one. Level: 1. FRE: 14.5. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 17.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews say the restaurant has a delightful menu, great cocktails, and a relaxed atmosphere with locals and professors. From such reviews, we decide if we want to go and understand if the restaurant is good. Level: 9. FRE: 94.27. Total words: 35. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 47.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews highlight a delightful menu, superb cocktails, and a friendly environment with locals and professors. These reviews help us decide if the restaurant is good. Level: 8. FRE: 83.71. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews mention a nice menu, fine cocktails, and friendly environment with locals and professors. We use these reviews to decide if the restaurant is good. Level: 7. FRE: 73.68. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews praise the delightful menu, good cocktails, and relaxed atmosphere with locals and professors. These reviews determine if we visit. Level: 6. FRE: 65.85. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews highlight a delightful menu, good cocktails, and a casual atmosphere with locals and professors. These reviews help us decide if the restaurant is good. Level: 5. FRE: 55.38. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews describe a delightful menu, good cocktails, and an easy atmosphere with locals and teachers. Reviews help us decide on this restaurant’s quality. Level: 4. FRE: 44.69. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 47.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews show a delightful menu, good drinks, and a relaxed place with locals and teachers. Such reviews help us judge the restaurant. Level: 3. FRE: 33.6. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews mention a nice menu, good drinks, and a relaxed setting with locals and teachers. These reviews help judge the restaurant. Level: 2. FRE: 25.8. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 2. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews tell of good food, good drinks, and relaxed air. Locals and teachers go. They help us decide on restaurant. Level: 1. FRE: 15.7. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: review. So here it says, what's a delight, terrific menu, great craft, cocktails, unpretentious atmosphere of mostly locals and college professors chatting over dinner. Okay, so we read this type of reviews and from these reviews, we decide whether we want to go to the restaurant or not. Somehow we capture the idea of whether this restaurant is good or not. Summary: Reviews say the food is good, drinks are good, and air is relaxed. Locals and teachers like it. Reviews help our choice. Level: 1. FRE: 11.07. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: It is unclear if the person felt positive or negative about the restaurant. Level: 1. FRE: 13.92. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: They do not say if the restaurant is good or bad. Level: 2. FRE: 24.75. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: It doesn't say whether the restaurant is good or bad. Level: 3. FRE: 31.80. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 18.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: No clear opinion about the restaurant is given. Level: 4. FRE: 45.56. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: The text doesn’t judge the restaurant. Level: 5. FRE: 51.92. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 12.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: This text doesn't show feelings about the restaurant. Level: 6. FRE: 65.12. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 13.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: The text is neutral about the restaurant. Level: 7. FRE: 72.32. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 11.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: It is neutral towards the restaurant. Level: 8. FRE: 83.14. Total words: 6. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 9.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: The writer's view of the restaurant is neutral. Level: 9. FRE: 95.34. Total words: 7. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 10.
Original sentence: But it is not saying, this is a good restaurant, go there or this is not a good restaurant, don't go there. So from this type of information, can you tell me if the person that wrote this text was feeling something positive or something negative about the restaurant? Is it positive? It's very clear. Summary: Neutral opinion about the restaurant. Level: 9. FRE: 96.43. Total words: 5. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 7.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: It is easy for us. We might create algorithms for it. Much research exists in text sentiment. This is called sentiment analysis.. Level: 9. FRE: 94. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 25.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: It's easy for us. We might develop similar algorithms. There's much research on capturing text sentiment. This is known as sentiment analysis.. Level: 8. FRE: 85. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 35.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: It's easy for us. Perhaps we could create similar algorithms. Much research exists on text sentiment capture. It's called sentiment analysis.. Level: 7. FRE: 75. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: We find it easy. We may develop similar algorithms. There's extensive research on capturing text sentiment. This is called sentiment analysis.. Level: 6. FRE: 66. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 4. Total syllables: 38.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: It's quite easy for us to do. We might develop algorithms that mirror this process. Extensive research focuses on text sentiment capture, known as sentiment analysis.. Level: 5. FRE: 55. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 39.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: We find the task quite easy. We could develop algorithms to do similar tasks. A lot of research aims to capture sentiment in text, termed sentiment analysis.. Level: 4. FRE: 45. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: The task is not difficult for us. We can potentially develop algorithms capable of performing equivalent tasks. Considerable research is dedicated to capturing sentiment from text, known as sentiment analysis.. Level: 3. FRE: 35. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 51.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: The task is quite manageable for us. We might be capable of developing algorithms that replicate this process. Significant research is dedicated to the task of capturing sentiment from text, referred to as sentiment analysis.. Level: 2. FRE: 25. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 52.
Original sentence: For us, it's very easy to do. So one thing that we can think is maybe we can develop algorithms that do the same. So actually, there's a lot of research in trying to capture sentiment from text. This problem is called sentiment analysis in text.. Summary: The task appears relatively straightforward for us. We might be able to create algorithms that mirror this process. A substantial amount of research is devoted to attempting to capture sentiment from text, a problem termed sentiment analysis.. Level: 1. FRE: 15. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 55.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: This is a cutting-edge model named DeepMoji, developed at MIT Media Lab, not by my group, Effective Computing. It was made using social machines. Level: 8. FRE: 55.51. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji is a state-of-the-art model created at MIT Media Lab, not by my group, Effective Computing. It used social machines. Level: 7. FRE: 47.27. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji, a state-of-the-art model, was made at MIT Media Lab, not in my group, Effective Computing. They used social machines. Level: 6. FRE: 42.66. Total words: 26. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji is an advanced model developed at MIT Media Lab. It was not created by my group, Effective Computing, but with social machines. Level: 5. FRE: 35.65. Total words: 27. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji, a high-tech model, was made at MIT Media Lab, not by my Effective Computing group. It was created using social machines. Level: 4. FRE: 23.6. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 36.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji is a leading model from MIT Media Lab, made with social machines, not by my group, Effective Computing. Level: 3. FRE: 21.93. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 35.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji is a state-of-the-art model from MIT Media Lab created with social machines, not by my Effective Computing group. Level: 2. FRE: 19.93. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji, an advanced model, was developed at MIT Media Lab, not by my group, Effective Computing, utilizing social machines. Level: 1. FRE: 11.3. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji is a high-tech model built at MIT Media Lab using social machines, not by my group, Effective Computing. Level: 1. FRE: 10.2. Total words: 19. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: And this is one of the state of the art models. It's called deep moji. It was developed in MIT media lab, not in effective computing group, which is the group I'm working on. It was developed on social machines. Summary: DeepMoji, from MIT Media Lab, is an advanced model made with social machines, not by my group, Effective Computing. Level: 1. FRE: 10.5. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 29.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: The idea behind this method is simple: using large-scale data and deep learning, 1,200 million tweets with the 64 most common emojis were collected. Level: 1. FRE: 16.55. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 45.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: This method involves large-scale data and deep learning, with 1,200 million tweets containing the 64 most common emojis being collected. Level: 2. FRE: 29.52. Total words: 23. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 42.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: Large-scale data and deep learning were used to gather 1,200 million tweets featuring the 64 most common emojis. Level: 3. FRE: 35.63. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 33.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: They used deep learning to collect 1,200 million tweets with the 64 most common emojis. Level: 4. FRE: 48.70. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 26.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: Deep learning helped collect 1,200 million tweets containing the 64 most common emojis. Level: 5. FRE: 53.21. Total words: 14. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 23.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: Using deep learning, 1,200 million tweets with the top 64 emojis were collected. Level: 6. FRE: 68.25. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: They used data to gather 1,200 million tweets with the 64 top emojis. Level: 7. FRE: 72.49. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 19.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: They collected 1,200 million tweets with the top 64 emojis. Level: 8. FRE: 82.79. Total words: 10. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: They gathered 1,200 million tweets with the top 64 emojis. Level: 9. FRE: 88.03. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 15.
Original sentence: And the idea behind this method is quite simple. So there's large-scale data behind this and deep learning. So basically, they took 1,200 million tweets containing emojis. So they selected the most common, the 64 most common emojis, and they were collecting a huge amount of tweets that contained these emojis. Summary: They collected many tweets with the 64 top emojis. Level: 10. FRE: 92.45. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: The problem is inputting a text to predict its emoji using their deep learning model, with code and an online demo available.. Level: 1. FRE: 12.84. Total words: 25. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 41.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: They created a problem to predict text emojis using their deep learning model, with code and demo online.. Level: 2. FRE: 21.63. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 34.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: They designed a task to predict the emoji of a text with a deep learning model, and an online demo is available.. Level: 3. FRE: 26.59. Total words: 28. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 43.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: Their task is to predict text emojis using a deep learning model, with code and an online demo accessible.. Level: 4. FRE: 32.72. Total words: 24. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 37.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: They created a task to predict the emoji of the text using their deep learning model and demo online.. Level: 5. FRE: 45.32. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 31.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: The task is to predict text emojis using a deep learning model, with the code and demo available online.. Level: 6. FRE: 54.71. Total words: 22. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 30.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: They want to predict text emojis using a deep learning model, with the code available online.. Level: 7. FRE: 61.92. Total words: 20. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 27.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: Predicting text emojis with a deep learning model is their task, and the code is online.. Level: 8. FRE: 73.14. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 24.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: They use a deep learning model to predict text emojis, with the code online.. Level: 9. FRE: 85.34. Total words: 16. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: And they formulated the following problem. So taking as an input the text, we want to predict the emoji of this text. And when, so they have a deep learning architecture, you can actually, the code is available and they have also a demo online. So this is a screen capture of the demo.. Summary: A deep learning model predicts text emojis, with the code and demo online.. Level: 10. FRE: 91.27. Total words: 18. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: So if you enter the text I showed you before, you'll see this type of output. Summary: When you enter the text, you'll see this output. Level: 9. FRE: 93.8. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 16.
Original sentence: So this is the emojis that are predicted from the text. Summary: These are the emojis predicted from the text. Level: 8. FRE: 80.3. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 11.
Original sentence: And what is interesting is that you see here different intensities of the words. Summary: Interestingly, you see different word intensities here. Level: 7. FRE: 71.4. Total words: 8. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: This is because the deep learning model has an attention layer. Summary: This happens because the deep learning model has an attention layer. Level: 6. FRE: 60.2. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: So if you enter the text I showed you before, you'll see this type of output. Summary: Enter the text I showed you, and you'll see this output. Level: 5. FRE: 50.1. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: So this is the emojis that are predicted from the text. Summary: This shows the emojis predicted from the text. Level: 4. FRE: 40.4. Total words: 9. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 14.
Original sentence: And what is interesting is that you see here different intensities of the words. Summary: The interesting part is the varying intensities of the words. Level: 3. FRE: 29.7. Total words: 11. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 21.
Original sentence: This is because the deep learning model has an attention layer. Summary: This result comes from the deep learning model's attention layer. Level: 2. FRE: 20.4. Total words: 12. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 22.
Original sentence: So if you enter the text I showed you before, you'll see this type of output. Summary: By entering the text I showed earlier, you will see this output. Level: 1. FRE: 14.8. Total words: 13. Total sentences: 1. Total syllables: 20.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: The demo captures each word's contribution to the prediction. It shows how removing words changes emojis and works well. Other similar models also perform well for tech sentiment analysis. Level: 9. FRE: 91.0. Total words: 31. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 40.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: The demo captures word contributions to prediction and allows seeing how emoji changes when words are removed. It works well, and other models for tech sentiment analysis work similarly well. Level: 8. FRE: 82.3. Total words: 36. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 48.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: The demo captures the contributions of words to prediction by changing emojis when words are removed. It works well, and similar models also perform well in tech sentiment analysis. Level: 7. FRE: 75.2. Total words: 36. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 54.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: The demo captures how each word affects prediction, showing changes in emojis when words are removed. It works well, and similar models perform similarly in tech sentiment analysis. Level: 6. FRE: 68.1. Total words: 36. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 57.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: The demo shows each word's contribution to prediction, changing emojis when words are removed. It works well, and similar models also work well for tech sentiment analysis. Level: 5. FRE: 58.7. Total words: 35. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 59.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: The demo captures each word's contribution to prediction and shows how emojis change when words are removed. It works well, and other similar models perform well for tech sentiment analysis. Level: 4. FRE: 48.9. Total words: 35. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 61.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: This demo captures how words contribute to prediction and shows how removing words changes emojis. It works well and other similar models also perform well for tech sentiment analysis. Level: 3. FRE: 34.1. Total words: 34. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 66.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: This demo reveals word contributions to the prediction by changing emojis when words are removed. It works well, and other similar models work well for tech sentiment analysis. Level: 2. FRE: 21.7. Total words: 32. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 66.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: This demo captures how words contribute to predictions, showing emoji changes when words are removed. It works well. Similar models also perform well for tech sentiment analysis. Level: 1. FRE: 17.8. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 66.
Original sentence: So it can capture the contribution of the different words to this prediction. And actually, this demo is very cool, because you can cross the different words and see how the emojis change when you remove some words. So this is working pretty well. And there are other models that are similar to this one that also work pretty well for tech sentiment analysis. Summary: The demo is very cool. It captures word contributions to prediction and shows emoji changes when words are removed. Similar models also work well for tech sentiment analysis. Level: 1. FRE: 10.9. Total words: 30. Total sentences: 3. Total syllables: 72.
